yet again Israel is accused of
committing war crimes against
Palestinians This Time by a unbacked
commission of inquiry it says hass's
October attacks didn't happen in a
vacuum Palestinian armed groups also
received a share of the blame but who
will enforce accountability this is
Inside Story
welcome to the program I'm NE Barker a
report by a un back Commission of
inquiry finds Israel has committed war
crimes and crimes against humanity
during the more than 8 months of war in
Gaza It also says Hamas and other
Palestinian armed groups violated
International humanitarian law during
their attack on Southern Israel in
October the conclusions follow thousands
of interviews with victims and advanc
forens analysis of medical reports and
satellite images but both a un Security
Council resolution and a binding ruling
by the un's top Court have failed to
Halt Israel's offensive will this
damning evidence further isolate
Benjamin netanyahu's right-wing
government and could it make
international support for Israel led by
its strongest Ally the US increasingly
untenable we'll put these questions to
our guests in just a moment but first
this report by Michael
Apple war crimes and breaches of
international humanitarian law just some
of the damning findings against Israel
in a new UN report report focused it was
compiled by an independent Commission of
inquiry tasked with investigating events
in Palestinian territories and
Israel it was no easy task Israel has
obstructed the commission's
investigations and prevented its access
not only to Israel and Gaza but to the
occupied Palestinian
territory some of the conclusions
include Israel used starvation as a
method of warfare its troops
intentionally attacked civilians and
carried out acts of sexual violence
amounting to
torture it also found the total Siege
imposed on Gaza was Collective
punishment and that in the occupied West
Bank the government was stoking settler
violence against Palestinian communities
and the only conclusion you can draw is
that the Israeli Army is one of the most
criminal armies in the
world but I'll leave morality to
Netanyahu to determin the Israeli Army
the IDF is one of the most moral
militaries in the
world the commission also condemns Hamas
and other Palestinian armed groups
saying the attacks in southern Israel on
October the 7th amount to war crimes but
the group argues comparisons shouldn't
be drawn with Israel because Hamas
Fighters are fighting a genocide carried
out by occupying
forces the report does however
acknowledge that hamas's attack didn't
occur in a vacuum that it was preceded
by Decades of violence illegal
occupation and Israel's denial of
Palestinian right to
self-determination its recommendations
call on the Israeli government to
implement a ceasefire in Gaza and comply
with the orders of the un's Top Court
Israel must immediately hold its
military
offense reports documenting crimes on
both sides are piling up begging the
question will accountability become
another victim of this war Mike lepple
Al jazer for Inside
Story okay let's bring in our panel of
guests now for more perspective on the
report Bill van esfeld is join us from
Toronto he's the acting Israel and
Palestine associate director of the
Middle East and North Africa program at
Human Rights Watch in Tel Aviv URI dry
is a former Israeli government spokesman
and founding president of the Jerusalem
Press Club and in London William law is
the editor of Arab digest an online
current affairs newsletter and a veteran
Middle East correspondent welcome all
three of you to Inside Story Bill if I
can start with you 7,000 pieces of
evidence paint an image of these alleged
atrocities carried out by both
Palestinian fighters on October the 7th
and the Israeli military since then over
the past many months now the Catalyst of
course being the decades long occupation
it appears that we cannot when it comes
to these findings underestimate what
light they shine on the basis of the
conflict and how the conflict has uh
developed in the very months that it's
been underway
yeah that's right I think these uh
reports from the UN Commission of
inquiry on uh International Crimes by
Israeli forces as well as by the
Palestinian armed groups are important
for their conclusion that again as
you're as you said this didn't happen in
a vacuum that the kinds of atrocity
crimes we've been seeing since October
7th um really come out of a context of
Decades of impunity for this kind of
abuse I mean you uh we've been talking
about war crimes in the Israeli
Palestinian context crimes against
humanity for many many years and victims
have never really had any access to
Justice there has also been outright
denial uh of crimes occurring and
blockages of access to Justice by
Israel's main Ally the United States
over many years at the security Council
and in other forums um so you know this
these reports are I think adding to the
mountain of evidence um that uh you know
grave crimes have been committed and
they're raising the stakes for the
internation community and again to point
the finger at the United States which
claims to want a rules-based
international order when you've got this
amount of evidence piling up of the most
egregious abuses of that of those
International rules you know what are
you going to do about it are you going
to allow impunity to persist for more
decades and see another round of
incredible violence like this are you
going to finally put some political
muscle um and and pressure Israel and
pressure the International Community to
demand accountability uh at long last
well hopefully get stuck into whether or
not there is uh political muscle a
little bit later on in the program but
just to be clear to our viewers this
report I have an advanced copy of it
here consists of two parallel
investigations one focused on the
October the 7th attack uh on Israel led
by armed Palestinian groups and the
other of course on Israel's military
response let's get to Israel in a minute
but first let's focus on on Hamas
because according to the report 800
civilians were among the more than 1200
killed by Hamas and other armed
Palestinian groups it includes what the
report calls quote sexual and gender
based violence against a number of
civilians something that has Hamas has
always denied also we need to get into
specifics here the case of a 79-year-old
woman and her 12-year-old autistic
granddaughter shot dead apparently
because they were slowing down the
retreat of the captors the examples go
on and on and on orri how do these
findings do you think shape our
understanding of October the 7th and
what will Israel make make of these
allegations against
Hamas well uh as you mentioned the the
uh the report really uh focuses on on
both sides but there's there's cause and
effect here which is a sometime people
tend to to forget because uh the whole
event didn't just happen by itself it
happened when Hamas launched this
terrorist attack this heinous terrorist
attack in October 7th and then what
followed was the Israeli response uh
which I think any democracy trying to
defend the
Civ population uh would do so there's a
cause and effect here uh and once you
put them uh on the on the on the same uh
uh scales uh you're missing the point I
think there's you mentioned
accountability at the beginning uh I
think there's one uh word missing in the
uh radical Islam vocabulary and that is
accountability they launched the 7th
October attack and then they cry wol
they say oh my God see what happened
because of this um don't don't do it
don't launch this October 7th and you
don't get the the rest of it okay I'm
going to put the next question to to
William because Hamas has accused the
inquiry of equating the victim with the
Executioner of parting unsubstantiated
claims about what Hamas and other
Palestinian armed groups may have done
on October the 7th what does that
response from Hamas say to you about how
it regards this investigation and indeed
others
William well it says to me that Hamas
like Israel is prepared to attempt at
least to walk away from uh the
implications of this I think very well
balanced report and uh and I disagree
that uh this event 7th of October simply
occurred there was a context it came out
of a long long history of uh
suppression of Palestinian rights and
Palestinian
aspirations and and I think that Hamas
needs to take more responsibility we we
know that Hamas uses civilians as
Shields they've done it that does not in
any way make acceptable what the
Israelis the IDF has done in response
the diaa doctrine so-called the
disproportionate use of force the
targeting of civilian uh infrastructure
of uh of residences of so-called safe
areas uh clearly this has gone Way
Beyond anything that is acceptable uh
both sides are guilty of war crimes both
sides need to accept responsibility I
doubt that either side will and you know
we we we will I think discuss
accountability but it's going to be very
difficult to achieve
accountability in in this sort of a
landscape let's gentlemen move on to
what the report says about Israel by far
the Lion Share the report details a
catalog of unbridled violence starvation
as a weapon of war the collective
punishment and displacement of civilians
and intentional violence against
civilians not to mention torture abuse
sexual humiliation of detainees at the
hands of of course the decades long
occupa occu occupation um the commission
basically said they are so overwhelmed
with the amount of evidence that they
have to to Wade through it's difficult
to know where to start Bill are we
scratching the surface here given that
uh this investigation only deals with
the first three months of the
conflict yeah the number of reports
coming out are growing and weighty and
yet the scale of the abuses uh that have
happened since October 7th are are so
massive that I think I think you're
right um we are just sort of at the tip
of the iceberg in terms of what's known
so many families have been destroyed so
many people have been killed so many
children have lost one or both parents
um you know the number of kids who have
lost their legs who have been uh
amputated by the war is is an estimate
we don't even know how many people are
buried under the rubble um you know or
who may people may have died of
starvation or or preventable disease um
you know as you say the list really goes
on and so does the conflict and so do
the war crimes so you know there's I
think unfortunately no um alternative
but to continue documenting uh to
continue trying to apply pressure on the
parties to finally begin to uphold their
U minimum obligations under the under
international law and just one one
response um the idea that this is cause
and effect that you know what is that
everything that has flowed since October
7th was the result sadly or tragically
of of what happened on October 7th well
you know absolutely not um the the the
international law is based on the very
basic idea that war crimes and criminal
activity atrocities by one side do not
ever justify atrocities war crimes by
the other side so imposing a total Siege
and Collective punishment on more than
two million people is absolutely
unnecessary and unjustified in uh in in
Pursuit Of War goals um that's the sort
of thing these reports keep telling us
uh but unfortunately the parties are not
listening um Ori Israel says in response
to the release of this report that it is
quote reflect of systematic anti-israel
discrimination that seems to almost
mirror what um Hamas said in response
Israel complains about a quot quote
false equivalence between Hamas and the
Israeli
military is that defensiveness you think
shared by the Israeli people at
large well first of all
I I just want to remind us that I'm not
in any of official capacity now so I
speak only for myself but I know that
others in Israel uh don't pull this uh
automatic uh card of everybody's anti
Israel
um yes I I think by the way Israel would
be smart to launch its own
investigation uh which we talk about but
unfortunately it doesn't happen now
because then it at least uh the world or
the the the global Community would have
seen that Israel is really checking
itself but I think majority of Israeli
believe that uh when judging Israel
people take put Israel on a higher uh
standard High higher pedestal than than
other democracies uh fighting terrorism
and by the way people most people here
don't believe I person don't believe and
I know it's not the case with Israel to
Target civilians intentionally we go out
of our way not to uh to do that but as
was mentioned already Hamas is uh known
for uh surrounding itself with the human
shields uh so it's very difficult for
the Democracy like Israel uh to uh
defend itself and to uh achieve its War
goals uh legally uh if you if you wish
uh in fighting such conditions okay so I
would say no I don't think all the world
is against Israel I think Israel should
have uh checked itself first but uh at
the same time certain things are
expected from Israel that are not
expected from other
democracies talking talking about Israel
needing to to check it self William
Israel has long claimed to be amongst
the most moral armies in the world I
mean those claims appear to be withering
in the daylight when we look at the
details of this
report yes and not not just in the
details of this report but what goes on
day in day out um the argument of
self-defense yes but that's been
stretched the furthest possible limits
of of cruel absurdity this is not not
self-defense this is uh carrying out an
attack ruthlessly on civilian targets
and you know you've got to say and I and
I really am often when I hear it
astonished at at Israelis either whether
they're speaking on behalf of themselves
or government officials saying that the
IDF applies more stringent rules in in
its use of of of weapons than any other
Army in the world we are held to a
higher standard than any other democracy
the numbers speak for themselves the
numbers
are awful they're simply awful I mean
we're approaching
40,000 killed close to 100,000
wounded two-thirds of them women and
children this is not acceptable it's not
acceptable for Israel which says it is a
democracy to be justifying this
Slaughter of civilians okay Gentlemen
let's uh move on and talk about the
expectations and the limitations of uh
this report because one of the
interesting aspects that it reveals uh
are the lengths that Israel appears to
have gone to to obstruct the
investigation process itself and a
little bit earlier on I spoke to
Franchesca albanesi the UN special rapor
on the occupied Palestinian territories
who uh weighed in on that here's what
she had to say
Israel obstructed the commission of
inquiry an international Commission of
inquiries access to victims hostages
survivors
Witnesses why why what is uh what what
does Israel fear of being
exposed well I wonder if you can answer
Franchesca Alban's question there what
is Israel afraid of why does it feel
that it needs to put stumbling blocks in
the road for these investigators trying
to shed light to the world about what's
been happening in this conflict well
Israel's refusal to cooperate in
obstruction of um the work of the
commission of inquiry is really a part
of a pattern um Israel has not
cooperated with u most United Nations um
investigations we have the international
court of justice itself having issued a
provision
measure a binding order on Israel to
allow genocide investigators into the
Gaza Strip uh that has not happened um
indeed I believe the Rafa border
crossing uh was was pretty much burned
down and has been has been shut um you
know uh Human Rights Watch is not
allowed into uh the Gaza Strip through
Israel other independent investigators
are not allowed in um you know foreign
journalists have been have have not been
allowed in so yes this raises this
rhetorical question from the special
reporter from franches Alban what is
what is being hidden you know it's not
really being hidden that well because
look at the commission of inquiries
Reports look at a lot of other
independent and very credible um uh
sources of information about all the war
crimes that have been going on um crimes
against humanity in Gaza also against
Palestinian detainees also in the West
Bank which is more accessible um you
know but trying to uh hide the evidence
and trying to attack the investigator or
attack the messenger of of of the news
about these crimes
um it's a tried and true method uh this
is not the first time and again we need
political pressure on Israel um to stop
that and as your other guest said you
know we would also very much like to see
um uh Hamas and the Palestinian armed
groups uh fully participating taking
this very seriously taking these um you
know well documented um uh crimes uh
committed on October 7th seriously uh to
prevent their repetition but it has to
happen um you know at a at a large scale
it's got to it's it's got to involve uh
the participation and pressure um on on
Israel as well let's drill down into the
whole issue of accountability because
specifically the report accuses Israel
of quote undermining the possibility of
future judicial proceedings
accountability and Justice I mean
gentlemen given the failure of multiple
un resolutions in the past given the
complete disregard for the provisional
measures issued by the international
court of justice and the Hague over
concerns that a genocide is underway in
Gaza given the fact that there's been
this application for arrest warrants for
Netanyahu and the defense minister by
the international criminal court I mean
what difference at all will this report
make to anything yeah what what impact
will it have well as as you say it's a
long long and pretty dismal record of uh
un
resolutions of
Investigations of
condemnations that Israel has chose to
ignore chose to avoid and by and has
done very very successfully um I do
think however that this report because
it is so forensic and really shocking in
its detail and you mentioned this NE
that the reading of it is is is very
Grim uh for both what Hamas did but what
the IDF uh has done and continues to do
and I think that's the point for me uh
Israel says it is a democracy Hamas
describes as as as a terrorist entity
Hamas
is behaving in a way that many find
reprehensible but Israel is a democracy
here and Israel is behaving in a
reprehensible way so I do think that
it's this report will make it more
difficult for Israel's friends and
allies to sustain their support to
sustain the Nar that Israel is the only
victim here and that any
criticism uh of how the Israelis are
conducting this war is ipof facto uh
anti-Semitism and I think that that
narrative is faltering and I think it's
faltering it's certainly faltering here
in the UK I think that Joe Biden is
finding it increasingly difficult to
hold that line particularly when
Netanyahu as he did on Tuesday says
you're not giving us bombs you're the
reason why we haven't won this war which
you know again is it's a statement but
it also shows the contempt that netan
has for Biden and you know if he's doing
that with his great great friends think
about the impact it's having in other
parts in Europe for example and the
global south of course is completely
lost to Israel now uh or is it possible
to fairly describe this as contempt for
Net who's closest high the United States
and indeed
others well United States is still
Israel's closest Ally but uh I I I was
dismayed to see my prime
minister uh talking like this about the
greatest friend of Israel Joe Biden
and and and therefore me like many
others in Israel would uh uh not shed
tears if netan would leave us alone and
and we'll will will form a another
government which will act more sanely
especially Visa V our greatest friend
but I just want to say that Israel would
be smart uh to hold its own
investigation uh because that would EX
at least show that as a democracy uh it
is looking into seriously into what it's
do
also I should mention this suspicion
that many Israelis have towards these
kind of Investigation especially from
the
UN when when Israel has been picked uh
uh is the is is the parah
state I I understand that that it is of
course in Israel's interest to want to
potentially discredit how rigorous this
investigation is but do you think
anybody will credibly take a
investigation by Israel into potential
war crimes carried out by Israel
seriously I think so yes but at the same
time I listen to
whates Al said and I think Israel should
have uh done better and coordinated with
the with this I remember the Goldstone
report uh the government here refused to
cover it and only later much later when
it
did
collaborate uh Goldstone himself changed
his his tone and report so uh I think
the idea of not cooperating is not a
good idea okay uh but at the same time I
I mentioned the suspicion that many of
us have against these kinds of
reports um very lastly I want to turn to
you Bill if I may because I wonder to
what extent findings like this lead us
closer to Prosecuting perhaps the the
bigger most overarching key allegation
leveled at Israel which is of course the
decades long occupation of Palestinian
land yeah the um the issue of occupation
and let me just turn for a second to the
issues of apartheid and the settlements
because there's a whole lot of
international crimes that are relevant
here and you know the I C uh prosecutor
as you mentioned has applied for arrest
warrants for three Hamas leaders as well
as two Israeli uh leaders but all the
arrest warrants so far are just for
events since October 7th but the ICC has
jurisdiction going back many years
before that and a lot of people in the
human rights movement um have been
pushing the prosecutor to seriously
consider investigating and and and
Prosecuting people for the settlements
regime as well as for the crime against
ity of apartheid so it's you know the
context here is one of as as has been
said many decades of crimes but some of
those are among the most serious crimes
uh on the books what we need now just to
end with in terms of what we really need
uh for accountability look International
Justice is a long game uh prosecutions
may not happen very soon what we could
use right now is a suspension of arms
transfers okay Bill I'm gonna have to
wrap up the conversation there we've
reached the end of the program Bill van
esfeld URI dromy and William law
pleasure to have all three of you on
Inside Story and thanks to Franchesca
albanesi for her input and thank you too
for watching you can see the program
again anytime by visiting our website
al.com and for further discussion go to
our Facebook page that's
facebook.com/ AJ insidestory you can
also join the conversation on X our
handle is at AJ insidestory for me NE
Barker and the whole team here is bye
for now
[Music]